Dear Editor...,

The emergence and impact of tipping points have been of immense interest both in studies of social systems (e.g. crowd behavior, political regime change) and natural phenomena (e.g. ecosystem collapse, climate change). We have also seen a trend toward interdisciplinary collaboration, for example studying how human actions and envoronmental processes are fundamentally intertwined.  Yet despite widespread interest in coupled human-natural systems, it is generally assumed that the complex behaviors, like alternate stable states, are features ascribed either to social processes or natural phenomena alone.  

Our work shows how tipping points can arise in a stylized socio-ecological model representing farmers' sequential decisions to adopt agroecological management practices, and the ecosystem services that result from anthropogenic ecological change.  These complex systems-level behaviors are not observed if we consider either ecological or social dynamics in isolation, but emerge as very general pattern by dynamically-coupling a simple ecosystem model with a rational decision process over time. Because benefits of ecosystem services take time to acrue, farmers in environments with poor ecosystem services are dinincentivized to invest in maintaining them, while farmers in environments with higher ecosystem service value are more likely to bolster those services further.  This leads to a bifurcation in the adoption of such practices, a pattern supported by empirical data.  We show how such tipping point dynamics can have important implications for policy design over a range of issues, from land tenure to the design of agroecological incentive packages.  

Our generic conceptual model has implications for conservation and ecosystem service policies beyond the scope of agricultural practices as well.  Our approach highlights the importance of accounting for dynamic processes of ecosystems -- which take time to respond to changes in management -- and also account for the dynamics of individual human actors, who have the capacity to plan ahead. Too often, previous work reduces ecological dynamics to 'steady state', and human decision-making to 'automata' mindlessly obeying simple rules. We have worked in close collaboration with a team of social scientists, soil scientists, agronomists, experts in ecosystem services, conservation decision making, and mathematical modeling to develop a stylized model which is easy to understand, yet leads to some surprising new intuitions. Our work underscores the importance of working across disciplinary boundaries in a diverse team to better understand and manage the intertwined socio-ecological systems at the core of many of the pressing issues of our time.
